Proposal: policy based webhook configurations (#54)
kyverno/KDP: proposals/per_policy_webhook_configurations.md

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Policy-based Webhook Configurations
- Start Date: 2023-12-12
- Update data (optional):
- Author(s): @realshuting

# Table of Contents
[table-of-contents]: #table-of-contents
- [Meta](#meta)
- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Definitions](#definitions)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Migration (OPTIONAL)](#migration-optional)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
- [Prior Art](#prior-art)
- [Unresolved Questions](#unresolved-questions)
- [CRD Changes (OPTIONAL)](#crd-changes-optional)

# Overview
[overview]: #overview

> Configure Kyverno resource webhook configurations based on policy settings.

Reviewer: This overview isn't very descriptive and should be elaborated upon. Kyverno today does a form of this and so it needs to be explained.

Author: Will update it.

Author: >but we discussed having per-rule webhooks in the past which, although I don't see it stated, seems to be a complimentary decision. Is that not still on the table?

I linked to the other policy-based webhook configuration PR https://github.com/kyverno/kyverno/issues/8063 in the description. Is there any other prior issue logged for this?

> Configure Kyverno resource webhook configurations based on policy settings.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should briefly describe the current scheme and why that is insufficient?

Author: Updated. 

I believe the benefits under `Motivation` section point out current issues. Does that make sense to you?

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

> Kyverno has two webhook configurations registered for the selected resources by policies, a MutatingWebhookConfiguration and a ValidatingWebhookConfiguration respectively. For brevity, this proposal simply uses "webhooks" to refer to the two mentioned webhook configurations.

Reviewer: Are you also only talking about the `-resource` webhook for each? There are different webhooks for different purposes.

Reviewer 3: I believe it will be for `-resource` webhooks only.

Author: Yes, for resource webhooks only.

> Kyverno has two webhook configurations registered for the selected resources by policies, a MutatingWebhookConfiguration and a ValidatingWebhookConfiguration respectively. For brevity, this proposal simply uses "webhooks" to refer to the two mentioned webhook configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kyverno has two webhook configurations that are auto-created and managed for resources selected by policies, a MutatingWebhookConfiguration and a ValidatingWebhookConfiguration respectively. For brevity, this proposal simply uses "webhooks" to refer to the two mentioned webhook configurations.
```

Benefits of policy based webhooks:
1. offers the flexibility for webhook configurations
2. prevents unexpected webhook failures
3. reduces the admission review processing duration

# Proposal

There are two dimensions for this feature:

1. offer users the option to configure webooks' attributes including `matchConditions`, `objectSelector` and `namespaceSelector` based on the policy settings
2. register webhooks based on the policy type, specifically to configure the `scope` attribute of webhooks for namespaced policies

The following snippets list out how policy configurations are transformed to the webhook configurations.

**a. selectors that filters resource objects**

The existing attribute `spec.rules.match.(any/all).resources.selector` can be transformed to the webhooks `objectSelector`.
```yaml
spec:
  rules:
    - match:
        all:
        - resources:
            selector:
              matchLabels:
                foo: bar
```
The above rule will be transformed to the following webhook configuration.
```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
webhooks:
- name: my-webhook.example.com
  objectSelector:
    matchLabels:

>       foo: bar

Reviewer 4: Is it possible to use set-based filtering here? (ref: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#list-and-watch-filtering)

Otherwise I think this will be messy IMO, constructing an "OR" for these two policy cases:
```
spec:
  rules:
    - match:
        all:
        - resources:
            selector:
              matchLabels:
                foo: bar
```
```
spec:
  rules:
    - match:
        all:
        - resources:
            selector:
              matchLabels:
                foo: foo
```

Would end up in two unique webhook configurations in the ValidatingWebhookConfiguration -  or alternatively only `matchConditions` should be used

Reviewer 3: Another thing is what happens if we have a policy that matches all resources with a specific label and another one that matches a configmap for example? We will end up have a webhook configuration that matches configmaps with this label.

Example:
1.  The first policy matches all resources with a specific label:
```
spec:
  rules:
    - match:
        all:
        - resources:
            selector:
              matchLabels:
                foo: bar
```
2. The second policy matches configmaps:
```
rules:
  - match:
      any:
      - resources:
          kinds:
          - ConfigMap
```

The generated configuration will be as follows:
```
  objectSelector:
    matchLabels:
      foo: bar
  rules:
  - apiGroups:
    - ""
    apiVersions:
    - v1
    operations:
    - CREATE
    - UPDATE
    - DELETE
    - CONNECT
    resources:
    - configmaps
   ```
Therefore, configmaps with this label will only be forwarded to the webhook server.

Reviewer 4: It seems to me like our best course of action is to have a hierarchy for which changes are made to the webhook config. So if e.g. some policy has `any resource` and another has `resource with label` then our logic should decide that `any resource` > `resource with label`.
Then only the rule without objectselector should be added.

It sounds easy but I expect this to be reasonably complex.

Author: I wonder if we could start with the `matchConditions` and make the webhook rule and kyverno rule 1-1 map. This way it requires users to configure webhook filters with caution.

```
The above rule will be transformed to the following webhook configuration.
```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
webhooks:
  - name: my-webhook.example.com
    namespaceSelector:
      matchExpressions:
        - key: foo.com/managed-state
          operator: In
          values: ["managed"]
```
**c. configure the webhooks' `matchConditions` via CEL expressions (requires Kubernetes 1.27+)**
The new attribute will be added to Kyverno policy `spec.rules.match.(any/all).resources.matchConditions`.
```yaml
spec:
  rules:
  - match:
      all:
      - resources:
          matchConditions:
            matchExpressions:
            # Match requests made by non-node users.
            - name: 'exclude-kubelet-requests'
              expression: '!("system:nodes" in request.userInfo.groups)' 
```
The above rule will be transformed to the following webhook configuration.
```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1
kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
webhooks:
  - name: my-webhook.example.com
    # note: Kubernetes allows up to 64 matchConditions per webhook
    matchConditions:
    - name: 'exclude-kubelet-requests'

>       expression: '!("system:nodes" in request.userInfo.groups)' 

Reviewer 3: All webhook `matchConditions` must evaluate to true. It isn't OR-ed operation so we will have the same issue as above. 
I believe configuring webhooks `objectSelector`, `namespaceSelector` and `matchConditions` from the policy settings isn't a good idea as we will end up having multiple webhook configurations.
